hey friends so today we're going to talk
about one of the most powerful technique
in SQL the CTE we're going to learn
everything about it like why CTE is
important the different types of CTE and
we're going to learn their syntaxes and
we're going to Deep dive into many
examples and not only that we're going
to learn how SQL execute the CTE step by
step so we have a lot of things to cover
let's start with the first question what
is CTE
is it common table expression is a
temporary named result set like a
virtual table that could be used
multiple times within your query to
simplify and organize complex query so
let's understand what this means using
the following sketch so we have our
database tables like orders customers
and so on and in very simple scenario we
write a simple SQL in order to query and
retrieve the data from the database and
then in the output we will get the
results of the query so this is the
simplest version of querying data now
things get complicated in our project
and we could have the following
technique in our query so we still have
this section where we are saying select
from but now inside our query we can
write another query like for example
select from where which is completely
nothing to do with the first query and
we can give this new query inside our
query a name CTE and we can call this
query a CTE query Common Table
expression and the first query outside
the this CTE we call it a main query now
if you check this we have like a query
inside another query so now let's see
what SQL going to do with this the first
thing is we going to go and execute the
CTE query so the CTE query going to be
executed and we're going to go and
retrieve few informations from our
database tables now the output going to
be available only in the query and the
output going to have the shape of like a
table like for example the sales so now
the sales table and the orders tables
both of them are tables but one is
stored in the database and the other one
is an intermediate virtual table so now
what can to happen in the main query we
can go and start querying the sales
table the result from the CTE as any
other Nal table like we do to the
database tables so the main query going
to go and retrieve few informations and
maybe do some manipulations on top of
the sales table or let's say the CTE
results and of course the main query as
well can go and say you know what let's
go and query as well
few tables from the database so the main
query has two sources of tables either
get it directly from the database or get
it from the table that is created inside
the query and then once everything is
done the final results of the main query
going to be presented for the user as a
final result so as you can see the CTE
query has one task where it generates
like a table that lives inside our query
and we can go and use it as we want so
now this intermediate table that is
created from the CTE has two features
first this table will not live long so
once the query ends what going to happen
is going to go and destroy this table so
it will not be available afterward and
we are not able to query it anymore so
isq is doing here like a cleanup and the
second character about this let's
imagine that we have another side query
and it's retrieving tables directly from
the database tables now if you say let's
go and join those tables as well with
the sales from the first query well it
will not be working because isql going
to say I don't know what you're talking
about and that's because the sales is
only locally available for the main
query in the same query so that means
it's not globally available like the
database tables for any query it is
dedicated only for the main query within
the same query and now you might tell me
bar wait wait wait I have heard this
story before right so this is an
identical story to the one that you have
told us about the subqueries so what is
exactly the difference between the
subquery and the CTE well you are
totally right the story is identical
between the subqueries and the CTE but
still there are differences between them
so let me show you few differences now
let's put them side by side we have on
the left side the subqueries on the
right side we have the CTE so now if you
look on how we wrote the CTE and the
subqueries you can see that on the
subquery we are writing it from bottom
to top so first we have this inner query
the subquery and then then on top of it
we have the main query but now in the
other hand the CTE we are writing it
from top to bottom so first we write
this inner query the CTE query and then
beneath it we're going to go and write
the main query so this is the first
difference between them on the way we
write the query so if I'm thinking about
subqueries I start from bottom to top if
I'm thinking about CTE I think from top
to bottom but still you say you know not
I don't care how we write it they are
doing the same thing the subquery is
introducing an intermediate results that
is used later from the main query and
the same thing for the CTE it present
like intermediate table that is used as
well from the main query now let me tell
you the big differences between them is
that in the subquery the result can be
used only once so you cannot have
another place in your main query where
you go and reuse the results from the
subquery so you can use it maximum only
in one position and only once but in the
other hand with the CTE technique you
can think about the sales table as a
virtual table and not only you can use
it in one place in the main query you
can go and use it in many other places
so you can go and join it again so that
means I'm using the output from the CTE
query in two different places in the
main query or maybe from three different
places so you can have another place
where you go as well and query the sales
table that is only available in our
query so this is the main and the most
important difference between the sub qu
in the CTE it's from the name Common
Table expression we think about the
result of the CTE as a table so we can
go and select it we can go and join it
with any other table so it is like a
hidden virtual table lives inside our
query but the subqueries it's totally
different it's a results only for one
position in the main query and it's used
only once so that means if you want the
subquery in two three different places
you have to go and write the subquery
three different times so now you
understand why do we have CTE and why do
we have
subqueries all right so with that you
have understood what is CTE now the
question is why do we need CTE in the
first place what is the main purpose of
the CTE let's go back to the sketch now
let's say in our complex SQL task we
have to do the following step step one
we have to go and join the tables
together in order to prepare all the
data that we need for the next step and
now in the second step we have to go and
aggregate the data Maybe we are doing
summarizations now in our task we have
to do as well different types of
aggregations based on different data and
now what might happen is that we have to
go and join again the same tables in
order to prepare the data and perform
different type of aggregations like for
example the average which going to be in
the last step now we have learned before
we can go and use the subqueries in
order to make this logical flow so for
step one step two step three we will
have some queries and the final step
going to be be in the main query but now
if we keep doing this we going to have a
problem and that is we are repeating the
same step more than once so we are
joining the table twice in Step number
one and three for different purposes
which cause us to have two different
subqueries that looks exactly the same
and this is exactly the weak point of
the subqueries it might introduce
redundancies so that means the
subqueries alone will not help you to
eliminate all the duplicates in your
code but still we have different
techniques in order to solve this issue
so what we going to do we're going to
have only one step in order to join the
tables and then this data can to be used
in the step two in order to aggregate
the data and then we don't need the step
three of joining again the data we're
going to reuse the step one and we're
going to use the same data for the step
four which is aggregating the data using
aage and we can do this with the help of
the amazing CTE so now if you compare
the steps in the subqueries with the
steps with the CTE you can see with the
CTE we are reducing the number of steps
which can lead to reduce the size of the
query so now again here in subquery we
think about the steps from bottom to top
but in the CTE it's the way around we
think from top to button so that means
the first step on the top it's going to
be joining the tables and then below it
going to be step two and step three and
of course since we are repeating the
join we can to put it in CTE and then we
can use it twice in different places in
the main query so as you can see there
are a lot of benefits of the CTE it's
like the subqueries we are breaking down
complex queries into smaller pieces that
are easier to write manage understand
and as well we have like a logical flow
from Step One 2 three but with one more
benefit of that we reduce the
redundancies of our code so we don't
have to join the tables twice now I'm
going to show you a simple example how
the CTE makes our life easier in our
query we might have to do different
stuff like for example we have to and
find the top customers so we can put
this in one CTE and we might need as
well to calculate what are the top
products and we can put as well this in
another CTE so you don't have to put
everything in one big CTE then you can
have the same issue of having complex
query and let's say that we have as well
to find and calculate the daily revenue
and for this as well we have to put it
in one CTE now once we have all those
parts we can put everything together in
the main query so now if you look to
this structure you can see it's really
easy to understand this code it's easy
to read so CTE improves the readability
of our queries so that means your code
is divided into clear sections making it
easier to understand what each part does
now if you keep looking to this we have
another advantage of the CTE introduces
modularity so that means it breaks your
code into smaller manageable parts so
this means instead of writing one huge
complex query you break it down into
small smaller chunks using CTE each CTE
is like self-contained and handles
specific part of the problem and then
you can combine them all together in the
final query it's like we are putting
together a puzzle piece by piece and now
one very important advantage of the C is
the reusability so that means we can
have a result set that is used multiple
times inside our query so that means you
write the logic the code only once and
then use it in different places inside
your query this is very important not
only you are wasting time writing the
same stuff over and over but also it
reduces the errors and mistakes that you
might do if you are repeating the same
code basically if later you want to go
and change the logic then you have to go
and visit each time you have done this
logic and then do the changes and you
might forget some places that's why the
CTE is amazing you can write the logic
once and then you go and reuse it in
different places so these are the
advantages of using this technique the
CTE inside your queries
so again you are at the client site and
you are data analyst you are writing a
query where you are defining a CTE
called details and inside it you have
some logic and now in the main query you
are selecting the data from the orders
and as well you are joining it with the
details with the CTE multiple times
using multiple conditions now once you
go and execute this query the database
engine going to read the query and say
aha we have here a CTE and it has the
main priority so that means it's going
to go and execute the CTE first and now
let's say that in the CTE you are
retrieving data from the table orders
and the table orders of course in the
disk storage inside the user data and
now once the city is completely executed
the database engine going to go and
place the results in the cache and it
going to name this result as details
it's like a table name so the database
engine is done with the CTE it's going
to go now and grab the main query and
it's going to start executing it step by
step so the first step is that to get
the data from the orders so since the
orders exist in the disk storage it's
going to go and retrieve it from there
now the database engine going to check
the details okay we have it in the cache
that means we don't have to search for
it in the disk storage and it going to
start retrieving the data from the
details with high speed and now it's
going to go to the Second Step as well
joining the data with the details so
again the database engine going to go to
the cache and going to see the table
details and retrieve the database maybe
in different conditions and then to the
third time as well we are joining to the
details and we're going to get the data
from the cach so as you can see from the
main query we are using the result from
the CTE multiple times in different
places and the retrieval of all those
informations is happening in high speed
so this is one big benefit of using the
CTE is to utilize using the high-speed
memory of the cache so this means
retrieving the data from the cache from
the details is way faster than
retrieving the data from the disk
storage from the orders now once the
main query is completely executed the
result going to be returned to the
database engine and then it's going to
send it back to the client site and we
will see the results in the output so
that's it it's amazing right this is how
the database server execute the amazing
technique the CTE behind the
scenes all right so now for the CTE we
don't have only one CTE we have
different types of CTE so mainly there
are like two types of CTE we have the
nonrecursive CTE and recursive CTE and
we can say for the non-recursive CTE we
have two subtypes the first type is the
Standalone CTE and the second one is the
nested CTE and now what we're going to
do we're going to Deep dive into each
type and we will start with the easiest
form of the CTE the Standalone CTE it is
the simplest
form so what is Standalone CTE it is a c
query that is defined and used used
independently in the query so this means
it is self-contained and it doesn't
depend on anything it doesn't depend on
any other CTE or queries so that means
we can run the Standalone query
independently from anything inside our
query so let's understand what this
means we have our CTE it's going to go
and query the database tables and in the
output we will get an intermediate
results and then the output can be used
from the main query so the main query
going to query the intermediate results
and present in the output the final
results so now if you check our CTE it
is completely independent from anything
else so it simply query the database and
it has one output so since this CTE is
independent from anything else we call
it a standalone CTE now if you compare
this C with the main query you can see
that the main query cannot be executed
alone and that's because it needs the
result from the first query so we cannot
say the main query is independent cannot
be executed alone it always depend on
the CTE query so this means CTE first
need to be executed then the main query
can be executed so this is what we mean
with the Standalone CTE it doesn't
depend on anything else so now we can
understand the syntax of the CTE so we
have a very simple query select from
where so it is a very simple select
statements now in order to put it inside
a CTE we can go and use the with CLA so
it starts with the keyword with then the
CTE name it's like a table name and then
we have the keyword as in order to say
this CTE is defined like the following
so this is the definition of the CTE and
it has two parentheses the starting and
the ending so with this you are telling
scale okay now we are talking about CTE
and it has a name so if you are using a
query inside with Cloud we call this a
CTE query it is where you define the CTE
now of course we don't want only to
define a CTE we want to use it so
outside of this definition we can go and
use it like this so we are saying select
from the CTE name so that means we want
to select the data from the result of
the CTE and here it's very important to
use exactly the same name as you define
it in the with clouds so if you leave it
like this we can call this the main
query it is the place where we use the
CTE so this is the syntax of a very
simple CTE in SQL okay so now what we're
going to do we're going to have like a
task that's going to keep progressing
through this section so we're going to
start with the first step and we will
keep adding steps as we progress in the
CTE so now the first step in this task
says find the total sales per customer
and now of course since we have only one
step it makes no sense to use the CTE
but we will use it since we know that
there will be different steps later so
let's start doing that now before I use
any CTE I would like just to write our
query first so we need the total sales
for each customers it's very simple so
we're going to go and select and what do
we need let's go and get the customer ID
and we need to do aggregations on the
sales so summarize the sales and we're
going to call it total sales from the
table and now since this is our first
query we have to get the data from our
database so we don't have any other
option our data going to be in the sales
orders so let's go and get it and don't
forget to group by for the aggregation
we are grouping by the customer customer
ID that's it let's go and execute it and
as you can see in the output nothing is
fancy we are just aggregating the sales
by the customers so with that you have
so the task but now I would like to put
my query in a CTE and that's because
later we're going to add more steps so
let's put our query in a c and in order
to do that we're going to start with the
with keyword and now we have to define
the name of the CTE so I'm going to call
it ctor total sales like this and then
afterward we're going to say as and then
we have to go and add the parenthesis at
the start and as well at the end and
with that we are telling esql this query
is a CTE query so that means the SQL
should store the result of this query in
a cach in memory to be used later in the
main query our CTE and of course what is
missing is the main query and we have to
do it exactly after the definition of
the CTE I will just make here a small
comment about the main query and let me
just make this smaller like this and now
we have to go and have a very simple
select
statements from and now I would like to
get more details from the customers
table so I will just go now to the
customers so now we are not querying the
CTE right we are just querying the
database table that we have and I would
like to get from the customer the
customer ID and the first name and let's
go and get as well the last name
name so now if we go and query this what
happens in the output we are getting the
data actually completely from the
database table the customers and of
course we are not using at all the CTE
inside our main query of course we can
do that but it's just waste of like
space in the memory because SQL did
execute this and stored it in the
database memory and of course we would
like to use the CT in our main query so
let's go and do that so let's go and do
a join but this time we're going to join
the data from the CTE so let's go and
get the name and I will just call it CTS
so what we are doing now we are joining
the physical table the customers with
the virtual table that we have created
with the CTE that exist only in our
query and of course not only are joining
the tables we would like to get the
informations from the CT so CTS and we
need only that total sales so total
sales
so that means those three columns comes
from our database table customers and
only this column the total sales comes
from our CTE so let's go and execute the
whole thing now as you can see in the
output everything is working we have the
three columns from the table customers
and we have the total sales for each
customer and this total sales comes from
our CTE now as you can see the last
customer has a null over here and that's
because in the table orders we don't
have the customer five and now you might
say you know what I would like to see
the intermediate result from the CTE
because what we are seeing now in the
output is the final result from the main
query so now what we can do in order to
see the result of the CTE we're going to
Mark the query in the CTE of course
without any parenthesis or the wi so
just the query and execute it and with
that you can see in the output the
intermediate results that we are passing
to the main query and as you can see we
don't have here customer number five
that's why in the final results we are
getting null and that's of course
because we are using the lift join so if
I execute the whole thing you can see we
are getting the customer 5 over here
with the null so as you can see CTE is
very simple we just treat it as any
normal database table but this table is
Created from our query that we have
defined in the CTE over here now of
course in the CTE you can use any kind
of claes like select from join group by
having everything that you want window
functions all aggregate functions but
there is only one restriction you cannot
go and use the order by Cloud so you
cannot sort the data in the CTE so let's
go and try it out let's go and say order
by and let's say I want to sort by the
order ID for example so let's go and
execute it you can see here SQL is
saying okay I cannot do it for you
because order buy is not allowed in many
things so you cannot use it in views in
subqueries in commentable Expressions
the CTE over here so it is not allowed
you cannot use order bu in the CTE but
of course you can go and sort the data
in the main query so if you go over here
and say order by customer ID so if we
execute it it going to be working so in
the main quer you can use order buy but
in the CTE this is the only thing that
you cannot use inside the CTE so that's
it this is our first CTE in this section
all right so this is the simplest form
of the CTE the Standalone now we can
have not only one CTE we can have
multiple
CTE so it's going to look like this we
have our database and this time we don't
have only one CTE we have multiple CTE
in our query and each CTE is going
directly to the database and it will
query the database in order to prepare
the intermediate results so in this
example four cdes is going to the
database and preparing four different
intermediate results and of course SQL
going to execute it from the top to the
bottom so first the C1 then two 3 four
but they have nothing to do with each
others so now once we have all the four
intermediate results the main query
going to go and retrieve all those
informations and do some magic in order
to prepare the final result for the end
user so now by looking to this sketch
you can understand all those cdes are
independent from each others so there is
no nesting or something each CTE is
self-contained and it could be executed
on its own without depending on any
other results from any other CTE or any
other query so it goes directly to the
database and get the data so that's why
all of them are Standalone CDs and since
we have multiple CDs then it is
Standalone multiple cities that's it
it's simple so now let's check the
syntax of the multiple Standalone cities
so we're going to start writing our
first city so it start with the with CLA
and then we have the CTE name and then
the logic of our CTE so nothing new this
this is how we Define the CTE and then
in order to use it we're going to have
our main query where we select from our
new CTE and we make sure we are using
the name of our CTE so nothing new now
in order to add another CTE to our query
what we're going to do we're going to go
after the definition of the CTE and
below it we're going to go and start
defining the cte2 but this time as you
can see we are not using the with Cloud
we are using a comma so that means only
the first be using the wi clouds in
order to tell SQL we are talking about
CDE all the other cdes you're going to
separate it using the comma so the
syntax going to be comma instead of with
then the name of the C and then we're
going to say as the following definition
so we're going to write here the query
of the second CTE so now of course if
you want to go and add more CTE you go
and use the comma below it and as well
you define the third City so you can
have as much Citys as you want and
always was separated with comma but only
the first CTE start with the with and of
course in the main query we can go and
use the results from the cte2 where we
are for example here joining the data
between the city 1 and city2 so as you
can see in the main query here we are
like collecting the data from these
different CTE in order to do the final
step in the main query it start with the
wi so SQL understands okay now we are
talking about CTE and once SQL sees
after the parenthesis comma SQL can
understand okay now we are talking about
another CTE and now if you don't go and
use a comma after the parenthesis SQL
can understand okay we don't have any
more CTE then next query it's about the
main query so this is how you create
multiple Standalone CTS all right so now
back to our task where we are creating
like a report step by step so now we
have in the task a second step where it
says find the last order date for each
customer so now we have to go and add
one more information about our customer
so when the last time the customer did
order order so how we going to do it now
we have to add this to our query and I
would like to use as well the CTE in
order to have this logic so as we
learned from the first task this is the
first step in order to find the total
sales for each customer and here we have
the main query now I would like to put
now in between another CTE and as we
learned from the syntax we have to go
and add a comma we cannot go and use the
with again and we have to give it the
name so let's call it CTE and last order
so like this and we have to Define it so
as and then double parenthesis and now
in between we have to go and add our
logic so now we have to focus only in
this logic so forget about the other CTE
and the main query so we have to find
the last order date for each customer so
we're going to go and query again the
table orders so what do we need we need
the customer ID we need the order
date from our table sales orders
so that's it for now let just select it
and execute it and now with that you can
see all the customers and as well all
the orders but we would like to have the
highest order for each customer and we
can go and use our aggregate function
the max function so what we're going to
do it's like here at the top so we have
to go and use the function Max and group
up by the customer ID so group up the
customer
ID and let me just shift it like this
and let's give it the name last order so
like this and as you can see I'm just
selecting now only my query I'm not
selecting everything and I keep
executing in order just to check the
results before we integrate it in the
main query so now as you can see we have
for each customer one row and we have as
well the highest order for each customer
so with that we have solved this subtask
so as you can see it's really easy to
extend I'm just making like another box
box and I'm adding inside it the
business logic that I want and this
going to solve one problem from the
whole task so you feel now exactly the
power of the CTE we are making complex
logic but still it's easy to add now
imagine you are not doing this you are
always extending one big query it's
going to be really hard to extend and
that's why a lot of SQL developers
really love using tte and they like use
it in each query or in each task that
they have so we have solved this task
and we have to go now integrate it in
the main query it's going to be very
simple so we're going to get over here
and we will go and just add another join
so we're going to join it with the CTE
and as you can see SQL Now is offering
it as a table even though it is not the
physical table that exist in our
database it only lives inside our data
but still SQL treat it as a table and
this is exactly what we are doing we
treat those informations as table so CTE
the last order and I will call it CL and
then of course we have to go and do the
same condition like here so the clo
customer ID should be equal to the
customer ID from the first table the
customers and of course we have to go
and add this new information to the main
query so
clo the last order so now what we're
going to do we're going to go and
execute the whole thing so we have now
two cdes and as well our main query so
let's go ah and execute it now again
let's check the data the first three
columns comes from the physical table
customers the fourth one the total sales
comes from our Fair City over here so
from here and the last order comes from
our new city that we just defined the
city number two so as you can see guys
Everything feels like organized and
structures and we have like flow and of
course those CTE are Standalone CES so
we can go always and select the city and
execute it subtly it doesn't need
anything else from outside this quer it
just needs the tabls inside your
database so guys again here pay
attention if you want to add more ctes
use the comma you cannot go and use for
example here I another wi so if I
execute it I will get an error so you
have to separate it with comma and
another mistake that I do frequently
that I forget and go add here like to
the last CTE comma and this happens to
me if I'm using a lot of CTE so if I go
and do it like this I will get as well
an error because the main query doesn't
need a comma so the last C should not
has a comma after the parenthesis so I
just removed it and execute so guys with
us we have now multiple CS inside our
query all right so now what is a nested
CTE it is a CTE inside another CTE so
it's kind of like subqueries a query
inside another query so not only a main
query can use the result of CTE another
CTE can use the result from a CTE and of
course the Ned CTE is like Like A Min
query is depend on other queries that
means you cannot go and select it and
run it independently from the query so
always you have to run the CTE inside it
first before seeing the result of theed
CTE okay so now let's understand what
this means again we have our database
and we have a city query that goes
directly to the database and queries the
data from there and in the output we
will get the intermediate results and
now in this scenario this time we will
not have only one intermediate result
results because we have many different
steps we need another intermediate
results before everything is prepared
for the main query so that means we have
another step that's going to be built up
on top of the first intermediate results
so that means we can have another CTE
that's going to be querying the results
from the first CTE and build on top of
it another intermediate result so as you
can see here we have cte1 and cte2 and
that means now we have like two
intermediate results and now of course
we can go and add CTE 3 4 and so on but
now let's say that the cte2 going to
prepare the final intermediate result
for the main query so now the main query
going to go and query the second
intermediate results and it going to do
the final step where the final result
can be presented for the user and of
course if it is needed the main query
can access not only the second
intermediate result from the second CTE
but also the first intermediate result
from the cte1 now we call the first CTE
a standalone CTE because it doesn't
depend on any intermediate results it
goes directly to database and get the
data but now since the second CTE is
completely depending on the cte1 so this
time we're going to call this CTE a
nested CTE because we cannot go and
excuse it on its own it always depends
on the cte1 and of course the main C is
depending on everything so as you can
see using the CTE we're going to go and
build like a chain so this is what we
mean with the Standalone CTE and nested
CTE okay so now let's understand the
syntax of the nested CTE so we start as
usual with the definition of the fair
City using the whis clouds and then the
name of the city and the definition of
the city so here it's nothing new now we
go and Define the second CTE as we
learned using the comma then the name of
the CTE and the definition so this is
our CTE number two so now the second CTE
is depending on the results of the first
CTE so how we're going to do it it's
very simple now for the CTE number two
we're going to select the data from the
CTE number one and with that we are
making the second CTE depending on the
first one so this means the second CTE
is getting the data from the first one
and it querying the data in order to do
the second step and with that we are
nesting one CTE in another and the cte2
is completely depending on the first one
so again we call the first CTE as
Standalone CTE because it doesn't depend
on anything we can execute it on its own
and it just need the data directly from
the database but the second CT since is
completely depending on the CTE number
one we call it in nested CTE so they are
very similar we are just selecting the
data from the c number one and now comes
our main query and of course it's going
to go and use the data from the Second
Step so it's going to go and select the
data from the c number two but it's
still of course it's not a rule it can
go and access the data and select the
data from the city number one so this is
how we can create a nested C in SQL all
right guys back to our project where we
are creating report about the customers
and we would like to add one more step
so the task says rank the customers
based on total sales per customer so
this is one more step inside our
projects and we would like to go and use
as well the CTE in order to implement
this step so now what do we need we need
to rank the customers based on total
sales for each customer so here like we
have two steps first we have to
calculate the total sales per customer
and then we have to go and rank it based
on this information and of course the
sales are stores inside the orders so
now let's go and start implementing the
CTE so we're going to have a comma and
we're going to call it CTE customer
rank as and then we're going to go have
the parenthesis and inside it we're
going to develop now the logic so first
we have to go and aggregate the data by
the total sales so select customer ID
and then sum the
sales from the table sales orders and
then of course Group
by the customer ID and now I can hear
you even telling me bar we have already
done this we have already this logic so
why we are repeating if we go to the
first CTE you can see we have already
done that and you are totally right we
have already the logic so it makes no
sense to repeat it again and if we do
this then we didn't understood the power
of the CTE so we don't have to repeat
the same logic and we can reuse the CTE
inside another CTE so now we don't need
all those stuff we can go and focus
immediately with ranking the customers
so first let me just select the data
from the first CD so I'm going to go and
select so what do we have we have
customer
ID and we have total sales
and we're going to select it this time
not from any physical table we're going
to select our CTE so like this and now
what we're going to do we're going to go
and select the whole thing and execute
it well this is the issue of nesting C
sadly this CTE is completely depending
on the first CTE so we cannot go and
execute it on its own and this is of
course very annoying because each time I
execute the query by the end of the
query isql going to go go and destroy
all the CTE so in the memory we will not
find the CTE and that's why once I
executed it SQL don't know anything
about this C and in order now to see the
result of this we have always to execute
as well with it the CTE that I'm using
so what I usually do I go over here and
make everything in comment in the main
query and now I can go and execute the
whole thing and now I will see in the
output the outcome of this nested CTE so
this is the big difference between the
Standalone CES like here and the nested
so now let's go back to our task we have
to rank those sales based on the total
sale so we can go and use the rank
function from the window function so
rank over and now we don't have to
partition the data we just want to sort
the data by the total sales
descending so like this the highest
sales going to get the rank number one
so let's go and give it the name as
customer rank now as you can see we have
a really nice rank beside those
informations customer three has the
highest sales and customer two has the
lowest total sales so with that as you
can see we didn't repeat ourself we just
reused another CTE in our current CTE
and this is exactly why this technique
is very amazing in order to reduce
redundancies and to reduce the
complexity of the whole query so nested
are annoying to execute but they reduce
the redundancies of our code now we are
done with our logic we tested everything
so what we're going to do we're going to
go and integrate it in our main query so
let me just remove the comments from
here and let's go and add it in the main
query so we will do the same thing we're
going to go and do a lift join with the
last city that we just created so let me
just call it
CCR and the same conditions we are
always joining on the customer ID but
don't forget to rename the ilas so it is
CCR customer ID equal to the customer ID
from the first table and of course we
have to go and select the new
information so CCR do customer Rank and
now let's go and execute the whole thing
now as you can see in the results those
three columns comes from the customer
table the total sales comes from the
first CTE the last order from the second
CTE and the customer rank comes from our
nested CTE that we just created so guys
it is not a simple task creating such a
report because it involves different
aggregations and different functions but
our work is organized as you can see
it's very simple we have step one step
two step three and the main query and
it's really easy to add more components
to our query now I would like really to
keep practicing using those Ned queries
so we have the following task we would
like to add one more step in our report
segment the customers based on their
total sales so I would like to implement
this as well using CTE so let's go and
solve it we want to go and add a new CTE
it's going to be CTE customer
segments as and then we have to go and
Define our logic now if you check our
task it has two parts we have to find
the total sales and then we have to
segment the customers based on this
information so it is something very
similar to what we have done in the step
three so that means we don't have to go
and calculate again the total sales we
have to go and use as well our amazing
first C so let's go and do it what do we
need we need the customer ID like this
and let's do basic segmentations using
the case when so let's say case when the
total sales if it's higher than 100 then
let's say the customer going to belong
to the group high and let's go and add
another category if it's not higher than
100 if it is higher than
50 then the customer going to belong to
medium and if the total sales is less or
equal to 50 so what's going to happen
we're going to say else the customer
belong to the low category so that's it
we're going to have an end and let's
call it custom more
segments all right but of course we have
to go and select it from a table and
it's going to be our CTE so total sales
and let's put it in our new CD and I
would like to test it before like
putting it inside our main query that's
why I will put everything in comments in
my main query since it is ined CD sadly
and we will just go and select our new
necessity like we have done before so
let's go and executed now as you can see
in the output we have two customers with
the category high and two customers with
the medium but in order to make sure
that everything working perfectly I
would like to go and add the total sales
just to see the numbers so let's go and
execute it well you can see everything
is correct so those customers having
higher than 100 in the total sales and
those two having higher than 50 but
let's go and change stuff around I would
like to have it like 80 as a medium just
in order to have low so with that the
customer number two having lower sales
than 80 that's why we are getting the
segment low everything is done and we
have segmented the users into different
categories so I don't need to test
anymore let's go integrate it in our
main query so we're going to do the same
things over here we're going to say Live
join and we're going to get our new CTE
so
ccs and we have to do the join condition
don't forget to change
and we have to select our new nice
information it's going to be the
customer segments and now we can go and
execute the whole thing so we have now
like four different CTE and one main
query and now we can see in the output
we got all three informations from the
table customers the first city second
third and this is our new column that we
just created so again we have done this
using a necessity like this let me just
add it
and it was really easy to extend and to
add to our report all right guys so with
that we have done like a mini project
where we have analyzed the customer
information based on different aspects
from our data and we have done it like
step by step and now you have like a
feeling on how to write complex SQL
queries using the help of the CTE and we
have done it like step by step so as you
can see if you go through the scripts
you can understand okay it is divided
into multiple steps and each block is
responsible for one specific problem of
the whole report and this is exactly the
power of the CT it introduce modularity
so each CTE is self-contained and talk
about one issue and this is amazing way
on how to organize your project using
SQL and how to structure your
work all right my friends so now let's
have little break in order to have a
real talk about the CTE but first some
coffee and now I can see that I'm
working with with SQL since really long
long time ago over 15 years and I can
say as well I have met a lot of SQL
developers in different projects and if
there is one thing that all those SQL
developers love is the CTE they love
using it everywhere like each time they
write a query they going to be writing
SQL CTE and of course it's fine it's not
a bad thing but the problem with that
they overuse it of course not all of
them pass a lot of skl developers
overuse using the CTE of course the is
very powerful but with power comes great
responsibility remember with great power
comes great
responsibility so my advice for you
especially if you are new to the CTE
that'ss try to not add a new CTE each
time you are doing something new and I
saw it a lot like for each new
calculation for each new column they
jump immediately and create a new city
and what happens at the end we can have
like massive number of cdes inside one
query and the developer thinks now
everything is organized and easy to read
but believe me it's exactly the opposite
if you open any code and you have a lot
of CES and especially if they are Ned
CES it is impossible to understand what
is going on even if the developer like
describe each CTE and the task of the
CTE it's going to be really hard to
understand and as well to read if
everything is like nested and you have
like I don't know 20 CD in one query so
it's going to be impossible to read and
to understand and as well you're going
to be using a a lot of memory and you
might get bad performance so my advice
for you try always as you are creating
new cdes to think about how about to
merge two cdes in one so it is really
always important to rethink and refactor
your cdes in order to merge it into one
and to reduce the number of CTE but now
if you ask me how many ctes are okay in
one query well I don't have a magic
number for that but normally I tend to
say between three and five CTE it's fine
so it's going to be easy to understand
and to read and so on but once you get
more than five CTE then you have to
rethink your code maybe you have to
create another complete query so you
don't have to put everything in one
query so this is my advice for you try
to not overuse the CTE in your projects
not for each step to always refactor the
CTE consolidate them and try to not have
more than five ctes in one query so
that's my advice for you be responsible
using the Cs and let's go back to our
course
so with that we have learned the
Standalone CTE and the N CTE and both of
them belongs to a type called
nonrecursive CTE so what is a
non-recursive CTE it means it is a CTE
that is executed only once so there is
no repetitions or looping or anything so
the SQL can execute it in one go and
that's it but in the other hand the
recursive CTE is exactly the opposite so
a recursive CTE it is a self reference
ing query that repeatedly processing the
data until a certain condition is met
and we usually use the recursive CTE if
we have like hierarchical structure and
we want to navigate and travel through
the hierarchy I know this might be
confusing but don't worry about it we're
going to have very simple examples now
again we have our tables in the database
and we have a CTE now the query of the
CTE going to be executed for the first
time and in the results we're going to
have the initial data from the CTE but
it is not everything yet now this
intermittent result is not ready yet for
the main query but instead of that it's
going to go back to the CTE and CTE
going to check whether the current
results is meeting a specific condition
so now if the check says no it's not
meeting the condition what going to
happen the city query going to be
executed for the second time so as you
can see we are looping through the CTE
now the result of the second iteration
the second execution will be added to
the intermediate result so now the
intermediate result has more data and
again before we can use it from the main
query it going to be checked from the
CTE does the result fulfill the
condition if it's still no then go and
execute the CTE again so we're going to
have a third iteration and new data
going to be added to the intermediate
result so this is our third iteration
now it's going to be checked again from
the CTE did we fulfill the condition if
the as answer is yes then the loop going
to break and everything ends so there
will be no fourth iteration of the CTE
so with that the CTE says okay I'm done
this is the final result of the
intermediate result then the loop going
to break and everything ends and the CTE
will not be executed for the first time
and now the CTE going to say okay I'm
done now my intermediate result is ready
to be used from the main query and now
nothing new happens the main query going
to go and retrieve the data from the
intermediate result and do some magic in
order to prepare the final results so
this means there will be no iterations
or looping inside the main query the
looping going to be happen only in the
CTE and that's why we call it recursive
CTE so now if you compare it with the
other types all other types are always
in One Direction and all the CTE going
to be executed only once but the
recursive CTE going to be keep looping
until the condition is met and only then
it's going to forward the data to the
main query and normally we use the
recursive CTE if you are navigating
through hierarchical structure so if you
have in your data like hierarchical
structures you can go and use recursive
CTE in order to navigate through it so
this is the recursive CTE okay so now
let's check the syntax of the recursive
CTE it is a little bit complicated but
we're going to do it step by step so
what do we have we have a query and we
would like to put it in a so we're going
to have the usual stuff with Cloud the
name of the CTE and ask and then the
query so this this is the definition of
our C but now if you leave it like this
SQL can execute it only once but we
would like to make a Lube iteration so
in order to do that we have to go and
Define a second select statement inside
our CTE like this so we are selecting
the data and here we have to define a
breaking condition so here in the second
query we are defining a condition in
order to break the lube otherwise it's
going to Loop for infinite or the system
going to break you could use it in the
work clouds or you can use it even in an
inner join because both of them are
filtering the data and you can use it in
order to break the condition all right
so now still there is something missing
how we going to make like things looping
well we have to reference this CTE to
itself so what we're going to do we're
going to say the second query going to
select the data from the same CTE so
that means we have now a query that is
querying itself and this is of course
what we want we want to make iterations
and we want to make a loop that's why we
have to go and reference it to itself
and now in you cannot have it like this
you cannot have like two select
statements in one query you have to
connect it somehow that's why we can go
and use the union all or Union depend if
you want to have duplicates or not so
now we call the first query the anchor
query the anchor query going to be the
first query that interacts with the
database and provide us the initial
intermediate results so it is the
starting point of the iteration and we
can say it is the first step in the
process so this going to be executed it
only once and it's going to provide us
the initial step the first step in the
process now we call the Second Step as a
recursive query and we call it like this
because this query can to be executed
multiple times and it will keep
repeating and add data to the
intermediate results until the condition
is met or let's say there will be no
more data that is available to be
processed so this is the syntax of the
CTE query for the main query nothing is
changed so we have to go and use the CTE
name in the main query so this is the
syntax of the recursive CTE so think
about it like this isq gonna go and
execute the anchor query only once and
then after that going to go through the
recursive query and keep looping and
looping and iterating until a certain
condition is met and then isql going to
go out from the CTE so this is actually
what we mean with the anchor and
recursive queries all right so now let's
have a simple task in order to
understand the recursive City so the
task says generate a sequence of numbers
from 1 to 20 so now let's do it step by
step so this means we have to create a
loop from 1 to 20 and after 20 the loop
should stop so let's go and do it now
the first step of the recursive CTE is
to build the anchor query so the anchor
query is responsible for the first
iteration so this means the first row of
the output so what is the first value
between one and 20 it is the one so
let's go and write a query that generate
the value one so select and we're going
to say one as I'm going to give it the
name my number so that's it let's go and
execute it now you can see in the output
we have the first member of our sequence
and this is exactly the task of the
anchor query it retrieves the first step
in the iteration so let's go and call
it
anchor query now the next step it does
we have to go and build the iteration so
we need a CTE so I will build now the
CTE so we're going to say with we're
going to call it serus and then we're
going to put everything in parenthesis
and then we're going to go to the main
query so this is the main query and we
will go and select everything from the
serus the CTE so let's go and execute it
just to make sure that everything is
working fine so we didn't create any
Loop or anything we have just created a
city on top on the anchor query and we
just call it from the main query so now
we come to the second step of building
the recursive CTE we have to build the
recursive query so let's do it I will
just make this a little bit smaller and
now before we start writing the query we
have to go and use Union
all in order to go and connect the
anchor query with the recursive query
and let me say this is the
recursive query so how we're going to
build it let's go and start with the
select and now next what I usually do I
just make sure that we are making a
recursive CD so I go with selecting from
and then we're going to use the name of
the current CTE so that we are
referencing the CTE to itself in order
to make the CTE recursive and to do the
looping now here comes the tricky part
so we need to create like the sequence
now what is the current value the
current value is one right now what do
we need we need the second value in the
sequence which is two so we can do it by
1 + 1 so if you do it like this you will
get the output two but actually what we
are doing here we are always taking the
current value and we are saying plus one
in order to generate the next value so
in order to do that instead of saying
one we're going to take the my number
the current value and we going to add to
it plus one in order to generate the
second value in the sequence so that
means my number always holds the current
value and we do the operation plus one
in order to to generate the next
sequence so having it like this what we
are doing we are generating the sequence
of numbers now if you go and execute it
like this let me just execute it what
will happen it going to breaks because
SQL will not allow it and SQL set it to
100 iterations so more than 100 isql
going to break the query so that we
don't have infinite number of looping so
this is bad because we didn't Define the
breaking mechanism of the looping so now
we have to Define as well in the
recursive query
how the loop going to ends and we
usually use a condition for example we
can go and use the we cloud and we can
say okay keep looping and keep
generating but always check whether the
value of the my
number is less than 20 and you might ask
okay it should be less or equal to 20
right well no because if you are making
less and equal to 20 what going to
happen once the my number is equal to 20
you are allowing one more iterations
where you will get in the output 21 so
that's why we are making it with 20 so
now let's go and execute it and let's
check the sequence it starts with 1 2 3
4 5 and until we reach the 20 so with
that you have solved the task again here
it's not that hard right we are just
providing the initial step and then we
are providing the loop where we are
defining inside it how the loop going to
ends now there is one more thing that
you can do with the recursive CTE is to
define the limit of iterations so for
example in your code if you say okay if
this iterates more than 10 times then
the SQL should breakes and stops so you
can Define for the SQL the maximum
number of recursions so how we can do
that we can do that in the main query so
if you go over here and say option then
two parenthesis and then Max
recursion and after that you can Define
the limit so for example let's go with
the 10 now of course we are iterating in
our code now more than 20 but here we
are making the rule it should not trade
more than 10 so let's go and execute it
so now we can see that our SQL breaks
and it says the maximum recursion is 10
so as you can see now in the output we
are getting the error of having more
than 10 iterations which is not allowed
so with that you can control how many
recursions you can have let's say that
you would like to have like thousand
iteration so if you go over here and say
you know what I would like to have a
sequence of 1000s if you let me just
comment this out so if you execute it
you will get an error because the
default is 100 but of course you can go
and increase the maximum recursion for
example let's go with 5000s in the
output it will work and you will get a
sequence of 1,000 so with this you can
control how many iterations are allowed
in your query so with that you have like
a control on it okay so now we can
understand step by step how SQL executed
the recursive query and here we have
like flow diagram in order to understand
the process the steps of executing the
recursive query so let's go and do it
now in the start we have the first step
is to run the anchor query so our anchor
query is just a select for the value one
so in the output we will get the value
one in my number and as you can see the
anchor query going to be executed only
once so there is no iterations or
anything SQL executed once and then goes
to the next step so what is the next
step is going to execute the recursive
query so it's going to go over here and
now what's going to happen we will get
the current value of my number the
current value is one and then we going
to add to it one so 1 + 1 we will get
from the recursive query the two which
is added to our results now it's going
to check the condition is my number now
smaller than 20 well yes it's smaller
than 20 and what's going to happen since
it's true a scale going to go and
reexecute the recursive query so now we
are doing the second iteration so again
is going going go to the recursive query
and I'm going to say okay what is the
current value of my number it is two so
2 + 1 the second iteration will give us
the value three so as you can see each
time the recursive query is executed it
is adding more values to our results so
the same question can be asked is now my
number smaller than 20 well yes it is
smaller well what's going to happen is
going to reexecute the recursive query
so ISC going to keep looping and
iterating and adding values to the
output until we reach the value 20 so
now isq going to ask is 20 my number now
smaller than 20 well no so it is false
and what going to happen the chain will
break and we will not Loop anymore so
it's going to be the end of the C and
this going to be the final results
that's going to be used from the main
query so this is how SQL executed this
recursive City okay so now let's have
another task for the recursive CTE this
time it's going to be a little bit more
advanced so the task says show the
employee hierarchy by displaying each
employees level within the organization
so that means we have to show for each
employee for each row a level that tells
us the hierarchy of the employee so
first let's go and explore the table
employees so let's go and select
everything from sales
employees okay let's go executed so now
by looking to the results we have like
few informations about the employee we
have information about which department
the gender salaries but here we have the
key it is the manager ID so this is like
self referencing to the same table so
for example the first employee the value
is null that means this employee has no
manager which makes this employee like
the big boss the CEO then now by looking
to the next two employees they have a
manager ID one so who is the manager of
those two it's going to be the first the
manager ID number one so the manager ID
number one is the post of those two
employees and then for the fourth one we
can see the manager ID number two so the
manager of Michael is actually Kevin the
second draw and for Carl the manager ID
is three that means Mary is the manager
of Carl and this is exactly what we can
do with the recursive ctes we can use
such informations in order to create
like a loop so let's go and do it step
by step first we're going to start with
the anchor query as usual
so this is the anchor query and here the
first step or the first record going to
be the highest manager which is the CEO
right the first record so in order to
select now the only the first record
what we can say we can say where manager
ID is null so let's go and execute it
and with that we have now the first row
and we can use this as the first step in
our iteration so now let's go and pick
few informations in the select like the
employee
ID and the first name and as well let's
go and get the manager ID and now we
have to start creating the levels right
so this is the first level so I'm going
to have the value one as let's have it
like level so our CEO has the level
number one so let's go and excuse it so
now as you can see Frank is the CEO and
he is in the level number one so this is
our anchor query now we have to do the
iteration right so we have to go and
start creating the CTE so let's call it
with CTE employee
hierarchy and then as and then this is
the definition of our CD so let me just
make it like this and of course what do
we need we need the main query
so main
query we will select
everything from our new city like this
so let's go and test it all right so now
we have prepared the CTE and the main
query and of course the next step it do
we're going to go and build the
recursive query but first we need the
union all in order to connect the two
queries and precursive query and now we
can start building the logic so now we
want to find all the employees where
their manager is the employee ID number
one right because they can to have the
second level in the hierarchy so what
going to do we're going to go and
select and we need the same stuff so we
would like to get the employee ID the
first name and the manager ID and we
need the level so this going to be the
level number two it's not correct yet
I'm must I just want to show what this
means because we need to get the
employee ID and the first name and so on
we cannot get it yet from the CTE
because in the CTE we have only one
employee so we still have to go to the
database and grab the next employees so
now we'll give this as an alas like e
and I will select it as well from those
employees so so far we are not doing any
recursive yet right in the recursive
query we're still quering the database
but now we don't need all the employees
from this table we need all the
employees where the manager ID equal to
one right now of course in order to get
those employees where the manager equal
to one so we can do it with the work
clouds for example and say manager ID
equal to one let me just select this and
query now we will get those two
employees where their manager is the CEO
the top manager but of course we cannot
do it like this what we're going to do
we're going to join this table with our
Curren CTE in order to make a loop so
let me show you what I mean we will
remove this we're going to use the inner
join and we're going to reference it
from the
CTE and let's give this the name c h and
we connect it like this so on we're
going to say the m manager ID of the
employee should be
equal to the employee ID so the employee
ID at the start going to be the number
one so it's going to be like
this employee ID now we are connecting
the manager ID with the employee ID and
we are as well reusing the CD inside
itself in order to make the iterations
and here we don't need the work clouds
because the inner joint going to filter
the data automatically as we learned the
inner joint going to show only the
matching rows from the left and to the
right so that means there will be
filtering so we are almost there but of
course we don't want to show it as a two
what we're going to do we're going to
show it like this level + one so the
current level is one the second
iteration going to be two and the third
iteration going to be three so I think
we have everything for our iteration let
me just check and make this smaller now
again we have here our anchor query this
is only for the top level manager and
then here we are just connecting the
managers with the employees and we are
reusing the CTE in order to make the
effect of the loop and as well we are
using the inner joint in order to break
the loop once there are no more rows to
process so let's go and excuse it now
let's check the output this is our top
manager so level one this information
comes from the anchor query then the
second iteration it is the employees
where the manager ID equal to one so
it's going to be those two employees so
those employees in our hierarchy are the
second level in our organization and
then we're going to search for employees
where their manager ID is equal to
either two or three and this going to be
those two employees Carl and Michel and
now to the third iteration we're going
to search for all employees where their
manager ID equal to either two or three
and now to the third iteration we're
going to search for all employees where
their manager ID equal to either two or
three and this going to results having
those two employees because their
manager ID is equal to three or two and
they're going to get the level of three
and then after that SQL going to try to
search for employees where their manager
ID equal to five and four and SQL will
not find anything and that's why it kind
of breaks so with that we have solved
the task all right I totally understand
if this is complicated but now we're
going to do it step by step in order to
understand how is scale executed this
and why we have done it in this way so
again we have our flow diagram we start
by running the anchor query then the
recursive query and then we have a check
if the check fails we iterate otherwise
we end so let's do it step by step here
we have the table employees and beneath
it we have the result of the CTE so the
first tip it says we run the anchor
query and we run it only once so SQL
going to go to the Anchor query and
start executing it so here we are
selecting from the table employees but
we are making a filter on the manager ID
so the managerid should be null so that
means we will get the record of Frank
and Frank going to be at the output and
we are saying the level of this employee
is one so we will have here at the level
one so this is the output of the anchor
query and that's it this will never be
executed now we go to the next step now
we will run the recursive query so
what's going to happen in the recursive
query we are saying okay I would like to
select as well data from the employees
and join it with the city results but
the join should be an inner join so only
the matching data between the CTE and
the employees and now comes the join
condition and this is the key for this
iteration we are saying the manager ID
of the employee should be matching to
the employee ID from the CTE so SQL
going to go and join the table with the
CTE so now we have here only employee
number ID one so going to do it step by
step searching for any matches so for
the first one we don't have a match
because the manager ID is not equal to
one so that's why it will not be
included in the result that the second
row here the manager ID is equal to one
and this is a match with the employee ID
so SQL going to take it and put it at
the output not only that is going to
increase the level so we have here the
current value is one so level + one what
can to happen we will get the value two
we are still in the same iteration we
are not iterating yet so this is the
first iteration of the recursive query
so until the whole join is done to the
next Ru we have a match as well because
the manager ID is equal to one and we're
going to have the same thing the level
going to be as well two because the
value of the level didn't change it's
still the current value is equal to one
andq going to keep going so two three we
don't have any matches and with that SQL
is done executing the recursive query
all right so now the SQL going to say
okay did we process everything well no
we still have missing output we still
have missing employees that's why we
didn't fulfill the condition and we're
going to run this again so now in the
second iteration isql going to join as
well again the city result with the
employees by matching the manager ID and
the employee ID but this time it's going
to focus only on those two IDs so the
two and three so SQL going to go and
find any matching where the manager ID
equal to two or three so isq going to do
it step by step the first one is not the
second one is as well not the third one
is not because the maor ID is one but
now to the employee number four we have
a match so it's going to take this one
and put it in the output like this and
now in this iteration what is the
current level it is two but we add to it
one that's why we will get in the output
three and then SQL keep going so we have
here the employee number five and the
manager ID is equal to three so what
happens SQL takes it as well and put it
in the
output as the result of the CTE and as
well the current level is 2 + 1 we can
to have as well three so with that isql
done joining the tables and you're going
to ask again did we process all
employees well yes it's true that means
we don't have to do any more iterations
because if you do any iterations isql
will not find anything so for example if
you go over here let me just remove this
and let's say we are joining with the
four and five so what going to happen
isq going to search in the manager ID
for four and five and it will not find
anything so that means we will not be
adding anything to the CTE that's why
SQL stops so we have a complete results
and we have now all the data from the
employees in the output and this results
going to be passed to the main query so
this is why we have done it like this
and this is how is executed this
recursive query now I would like to
visual for you what this means the level
or the structure of the organization so
the hierarchy looks like this the level
one the top manager is Frank so this is
the level number one and then we go to
the level number two so we have those
two employees so we have Kevin so this
is the level number one and then we have
two employees Kevin and Mary at the
level two so they work together and
their post is Frank so it's going to
look like this and they are at the level
two we have then Michael that directly
reports to who to Kevin because here we
have the employee ID two and two so we
have one employee here and as well Carl
is as well at the level three and she
reports to Mari and both Michael and
Carl are at the level three so this is
what we mean with the level it's going
to help us to identify which employee at
which level in the organization if you
have like hierarchy in your data
and you can see in one table things are
referencing each others like here the
manager ID is actually the employee ID
so it's like we are referencing those ID
to each others this means there is
hierarchy and there is a structure in
this table and you can use the recursive
City in order to build those levels and
to navigate as well through the
hierarchy all right so that's all for
the recursive City and with that we have
covered all the different types of
cities that we have in SQL
so now let's have a quick recap so we
have learned that the CTE the Common
Table expression is a temporary named
result like a virtual table that could
be used from different places in the
query and we have a lot of advantages
for the CTE the main one is it breaks
the complexity of query into small
multiple pieces which makes our query
much easier to read and as well to
understand so it improves readability
another advantage of the city is that
those small multiple pieces they are
really easy to manage and to develop so
those pieces are like self-contained
which makes our queries more modular so
it introduces modularity inside our
queries and we also learned that the CTE
help us to reduce the redundancy inside
our queries where it makes the results
of one query usable in multiple places
inside our query so it makes our code
smaller and reduced redundancy and one
more advantage of this CTE is that it
help us to do looping and iterating in
SQL by using the recursive CTE and we
have understood as well that we can
treat the CTE result as any other
physical table inside our database so we
can treat it and handle it like any
other tables only one exception is that
this table lives only in one query so we
cannot query the CTE from an external
query now we have learned that the
result of the CTE could be used from the
main query this is the classic iCal one
but not only we can use it in the main
query but also we can use it in another
CTE query which leads to having nested
CTS and of course we have learned as
well we can use the result of the CTE
within itself which makes the CTE
recursive and allows for looping and
iterating and I can only keep
recommending to not use more than five
CTE in one query otherwise you're going
to get the exact opposite and benefits
from CES where your code can to be
really hard to understand and to read
and even to extend all right so with
that we have covered everything about
the amazing and the most powerful
technique in SQL the CTE and in the next
chapter we're going to start talking
about the DL commands and we're going to
focus on the SQL views views are very
important technique as well for data
analytics if you like this video and you
want me to create more content like this
I'm going to really appreciate it if you
support the channel by subscribing
liking sharing commenting all those
stuff going to help the Chann Channel
with the YouTube algorithm and as well
my content going to reach to the others
so thank you so much for watching and I
will see you in the next tutorial bye